We have today come to this famous place, Hyderabad,
which was ruled by Muslim kings, but they
were very Indian and they fought also for
the independence of India with the British.
You know about Tipu Sultan, who was also a
realized soul but he was killed.
We have in our country one very big problem
and that is, individually we are all great
people, but when it comes to collective we
don’t know how to live collectively, and
that is why we lost our independence.
Anybody can manage us.
If we can
open our eyes and see, it is quite easily
understood that when people try to talk ill
of others, involving us, there must be some
intention.
This has been our failing since long, that
people use such methods that they spoil the
relationships.
And this should not crawl into Sahaja Yoga.
When I am in India I think I should put some
light on our weaknesses also.
The second weakness we have, that we are very
involved with our family; with our children,
with our parents, with our brothers, cousins,
this, that.
Till you are completely deceived or cheated
by someone so close, we never learn
a lesson.
We are very involved; all our problems are
around them.
We cannot get out of our family.
All the time we start thinking that: “Sahaja
Yoga should help my family.
Sahaja Yoga should do this for my family."
In Sahaja Yoga there’s another family that
has nothing to do with your family.
I have seen people, Sahaja Yogis who are of
a very high level, and suddenly I find they
have gone down.
They have no reason to suffer in health or
in any way.
Then I find out that they’re attached to
some brother or someone who is doing some
other kind of guru business.
Instead of we influencing them, they start
influencing us.
So we have to really break our relationships
with all such people who are negative, because
we have had relations and relations and relations
all our lives.
What did we get out of them?
If we do not understand how important it is
to be a Sahaja Yogi: that you are the instrument
of God Almighty.
So many things you know that even Brahma,
Vishnu, Mahesha did not know.
They didn’t know much about Kundalini.
They didn’t know how to raise the Kundalini.
They didn’t know how to give Realization,
except for gurus.
Out of them also you know that Janaka had
only one disciple.
All of them had one each.
So certain things you know are more than anybody
had known before.
But still if you are sticking on to your old
standards and old methods and confusing them
with Sahaja Yoga, identifying with them as
Sahaja Yoga, then your growth will be very
little.
So I have to tell you that, try to get out
of this.
“Who is my brother?
Who is my sister?”
Of course it’s a good thing to be attached,
in a way, to the duties that you have to perform
towards everyone, but all the duties should
be done in such a manner that you do not get
involved into it.
It is very important that you should not get
involved with those duties.
Whatever has to be done you should do, but
you shouldn’t worry as to the fruit of it.
Talking ill about others, saying things just
to spoil the relationship is sin, in Sahaja
Yoga.
Always talk good things about others.
For example, if somebody comes and tells Me
that such and such person is not good and
all that, I tell them lies.
I tell them, “That person was praising you
so much.
Why are you saying all these things against
that person?”
So it is important for Sahaja Yogis to create
a more synthesis, more coordination, more
combinations and more bringing in more and
more people.
But people get more attached to the negative
people than to the positive people.
That means still you are not in Sahaja Yoga
fully.
Once you start understanding this it would
be very, very clear-cut what you should do
and what you should not do as far as these
relationships are concerned.
I mean, in India it’s a common thing for
a minister to appoint his nephew, his son,
his wife, his grandson, even his servant into
some post.
It’s a common thing, whether they are capable
or not.
But in Sahaja Yoga you can’t do.
You have to be a Sahaja Yogi.
You can’t just get anybody because he’s
your relation and ask that, “Mother, see
now, he’s my relation.
Please help this man."
Why should God help people who are not Sahaja
Yogis?
He does not know them and He doesn’t want
to do it.
So our concept about family life has to change.
Of course the best thing you can do for your
family is to bring them to Sahaja Yoga, but
if you are sticking on to people because they’re
your family, it’s very dangerous.
Then there is second kind of a movement with
this behaviour, that you start thinking about
your own city: “This is my city."
You could have been born anywhere.
So, “My city.
Mother, You come to my city.
Is important."
It’s like: my home, my relations then my
city.
Then, my country: “This is my country.
Mother, You must come to my country."
I understand.
Your concern is good, it’s patriotic, that
you are worried about other people in your
own country.
But there should not be any attachment.
One should be detached, and detached in the
way, I would say, that just watch.
Just watch yourself and others.
See for yourself, why are you so much interested
in your own country or in your own capital?
Why?
Why is it?
When you ask this question you’ll be surprised,
mostly you’ll find: “Because I belong
to this place, I was born in this place, that’s
why I want."
Mostly; honest answer.
But could be that: “I want also that these
people should become Sahaja Yogis.
It’s easy for me because I am from this
place, I would like them to be Sahaja Yogis."
This is one of the basic reasons why Sahaja
Yoga does not spread, that we get involved
into pockets of our family and we don’t
go across them to others.
So all our attention, all our behavior is
completely entangled into something which
is not Sahaj.
So we have to go beyond and know that our
family is different.
The whole world is our family, so we have
to move out.
Don’t get stagnated or entangled with a
small circle of few people who are negative,
but go beyond them, because you’ve got the
powers, you’ve got everything.
You can easily cross over these barriers and
see for yourself that you are feeling now
mentally very happy, physically all right,
and spiritually you are there.
In our Indian society people take to sanyasa.
They’ll wear kasaya -
go out- many people after certain age take
to sanyasa.
Why not take the sanyasa inside just now?
What is the need to wait till you get old
and then absolutely haggard and then to say
that you are a sanyasi?
Even anyway you are a sanyasi at that time,
but when you are young you should develop
this detachment, a clear-cut detachment: that
is, you are attached to Sahaja Yoga and to
nothing else.
Nothing is more important than Sahaja Yoga
to you.
Once we decide that, then you move in that
line and you grow in that line very mildly,
very well.
But supposing you get short-circuited and
move somewhere else, then how can there be
growth?
It looks extremely simple to us: we must help
our relations, we must help all other ones.
To Indians it is very easy, it happens to
them very easily.
But the Western people are not like that.
They will not go about, wasting their energy
about their relations normally.
They are worried about themselves, and they
want that they should achieve the highest
themselves.
Now, once we take away our attention from
the family, you’ll be surprised how this
attention works across the family, across
this small little wall that we have built.
And you are surprised how it expands, and
how it gives you all the blessings and all
the grace of Divine love.
We always start thinking about our relations,
about how to be kind to them, how to be nice
to them.
Or all these things, all these behaviours of
how to be nice to them, how to be good to
them and all that, can be extended so much,
can expand so much.
As you love them, as you care for them, as
you are attached to them, if you get attached
to Sahaj then the light will spread.
For example now, near Hyderabad there are
many small cities, small places, lots of them.
You can all take up one city or one small
little village or something.
Go there and talk about Sahaja Yoga.
It will definitely work out.
That’s how in England they have worked it
out, and in many other countries.
So I have to tell all the Sahaja Yogis who
are here in Hyderabad and who are also in
other places, like Vishakhapatnam or Vijayawada
or anywhere; all of them should understand
that at least they can spread it in their
city, Sahaja Yoga, very fast, in case they
get detached from their family.
I know of certain Sahaja Yogis, their wives
are so strong at it that they cannot overcome
even their wives, leave alone other relations.
We have had an experience of such women.
Specially in India there is a rule that whatever
is the dharma of the husband, that the wife
has to follow.
But still I’ve seen that even the wives
can be very powerful because they’re so
assertive, so aggressive.
And if the husband is simple he has to suffer.
So here I would say that one should not succumb
to anyone because he’s dominating or in
any way assertive, but stand back and tell
that this is the dharma we are following,
and nobody has business to check us.
We are on a fundamental right, doing it.
Now the question is about how we deal with
each other in Sahaja Yoga, how we live with
each other, how we talk to each other.
What is the net result?
Do we have a complete rapport with other Sahaja
Yogis in the same city?
Do you invite them to your house as you would
invite your neighbours?
In any matter whatsoever pertaining to you,
any matter whatsoever, the relations have
nothing to do with you.
That’s how you will start getting detached
and not worrying about it.
Now here are the many Western Sahaja Yogis.
[SHRI MATAJI SPEAKS IN HINDI].
The description I’ve given now of when people
who are left-sided actually, they have attachments
of the left side.
The right side attachments are different type,
as you know very well.
The first one is that they are individualistic,
they don’t like collectivity.
They think it is a force on them; it is a
binding thing, so that they cannot rise.
Right-sided people have the biggest problem
is of ego, which is all the time sitting like
a snake, coiled up.
Something goes wrong, suddenly it comes up
– Ha! and you see a snake come up now.
The snake is very springy.
But now with Sahaja Yoga it is getting intoxicated,
I think; it doesn’t come up.
So the attachments: on what points do we get
upset?
We should write it down.
All right.
For example, what do I get upset with, Myself?
When I see a Sahaja Yogi becoming bhootish
I get upset.
But you just try to find out: “When do I
get upset?” and you’ll be surprised, most
of those things are out of Sahaja Yoga; they
have nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga.
But you are very upset and very angry, and you
don’t want to talk about it.
So this attitude of mind has to be changed.
When you are set now in Sahaja Yoga, how can
you be upset?
That means you are not set: simple thing.
You are now set in Sahaja Yoga.
So how can you be upset?
A very common language there is to say: “I
hope you are not upset”.
When you say somebody is upset, he’s upset,
I mean, may be whether you hope or don’t
hope!
But we do not also consider how do we upset
others?
We don’t also find out the ways and methods,
how not to upset others.
And even the humor we have, if it is pinching
humor, if it is disturbing humour, if it is
denouncing humour, that can upset a person
very much.
So what sort of language we speak, what sort
of communication we have, what sort of
harm we do to people: you need not be hot-tempered,
your ego may not be seen, but it’s the style,
very sly style of the ego, just to say something
horrible.
Second way is of criticizing others all the
time: “This is not good, that is not good,
this not good."
Who has asked you to judge it?
So you should not judge yourself, at the same
time you should not judge others and punish
them.
In our day to day life we have to develop
a very sweet language, extremely sweet.
We have to work it out, actually work it out,
because even coming to Sahaja Yoga still it
lingers, certain things, and these habits
can be corrected very simply, very easily.
It belongs to the tongue, not to us, so it’s
very easy to get rid of them.
The obstinacy is another thing which is a
horrible thing.
Anybody suffers from this kind of very subtle
obstinacy; obstinacy [SOUNDS LIKE “RESTS”],
these things are tied down with a rope.
Now whatever may happen, you are tied down:
“Once I have decided, I have decided."
“But what is the harm in changing?”
“No, no, no, no; we don’t want any change."
Now in Sahaja Yoga I’m happy, nothing is
decided, nothing is fixed.
We were to have Puja, say, yesterday; we’ll
have it today, that too in the morning.
It should not upset you because it’s all
done to keep your upsetting you away.
So when is the program and when is not the
program is not important.
What is important is that how you have managed
with that change.
If you do not know how to manage the change,
then your transformation is incomplete.
Now this English language I have learnt in
this lifetime, and I find there are some good
points about it, that you must say ten times,
“Thank you” even if somebody gives you
water, or fifteen times, “Sorry!”
morning till evening.
In a way it is good, but if it’s just a
lip-service, then everybody knows that you
have to say “Thank you”, so they said
“Thank you” so well.
But at the same time, if you remember how
graciously he did that for you, just remember
that.
Next time you meet that person, all this graciousness
will come out, because you get a feeling:
somebody does something for you, you get a
beautiful feeling of gratitude.
And once you get that feeling, if you remember
that feeling, then you’ll go on adding up
to it.
[SHRI MATAJI SAYS, ASIDE, “I THINK YOU ALSO
SIT IN THE SUN, IS TOO MUCH HOT”].
It goes on adding.
The more you add these beautiful feelings
within yourself: “How I felt when they did
it”.
Every time you get some sort of a experience
of that kind, if you keep it within yourself,
any time you open that area of your memory,
all the beauty will start pouring on you,
of that feeling.
So we have to learn new methods of making
ourselves happy.
Before that we used to be happy when we hurt
others, we used to be happy when we were sarcastic
with others.
But now we have to develop a new method of
making ourselves happy, and once your mind
goes on to that: “I have to be happy, joyous.
What am I doing?
Why am I doing like this?
How can I be happy?
By saying a harsh thing to others or by saying
something mischievous, how can I be happy?
I cannot be."
Then, “This Mr.
Ego, he makes me extremely unhappy.
He’s really spoilt my mood."
And you tell him to get out now, get down,
get down.
Then it will go down.
At this juncture when you are so advanced
in Sahaja Yoga, I should not have told all
these things to you; I agree with you entirely,
that now the time is not for telling you all
these things regarding your behavior toward
other Sahaja Yogis.
But even a slightest movement completely changes
the atmosphere.
So one has to be extremely careful and attentive,
has to know what you say, what you have to
say, how you behave, and how you create a
feeling.
In the society of Sahaja Yoga we have beautiful
people, we laugh, we enjoy, we do all kinds
of things, and really we are in the most joyous
company all the time.
After all it’s joy, and what we achieve
in joy is the highest.
At the same time we have to remember that
the collective subconscious is there, and
that may just jump sometime and come back.
Sahaja Yoga doesn’t believe in any revenge,
hatred; nothing of the kind.
It doesn’t believe in any kind of a false
pride, or any kind of restrictions or anything.
It believes in the pure sense of humanity
and also the great work of Sahaja Yoga.
It gives you great pleasure to be kind, to
be nice; so subside. To subside these habits
you have to do some apyas, you have to practise,
and introspect yourself.
I am not saying because anybody has reported
anything that is like that, nothing, in no
way.
But at this juncture I am just telling you,
because now when you will be going out you’ll
be meeting new people, then you might have
problems, might have problems of facing people
whom you would be harsh, you would be more
meticulous, you may be much more aggressive
than normal.
All these things will upset, upset them. But
if you are peaceful, tolerant, forgiving,
that will definitely make them feel that you
are saints.
If they are difficult leave them alone, don’t
argue, by argument you cannot give them Realization.
If they don’t have wisdom they don’t deserve
it, they don’t, they are not destined to
be like that.
But your style has to be such that they should
know that you are saints.
In all your self-respect, in all your love
you have to talk to them.
So now when you are here in this country you
have to decide how you are going to spread
Sahaja Yoga when you go back.
Same with our Indian Sahaja Yogis: they have
to also find out ways and methods, how they
will spread Sahaja Yoga.
May God bless you.